# hw-4
Working Prototype with JavaScript

This homework presents an opportunity to use JavaScript to build an interactive prototype of our habit formation app.

In the Web industry the point were we developers take over the build effort will vary by the type and size of organization we work with -- from a full ownership possibility in the smallest start-up to the possibility of focusing on the client-side engineering and execution of a built-out application template. In this assignment we are going to assume the later approach which is most common in larger Web aware organizations that employ specialists. In our situation we have been given an executed set of templates found in this Github repo and it is our job to make it actually work!

In this homework we will implement a number of features in our prototype using JavaScript, but not everything. We will mention upcoming additions in the assignment, but warn groups that our goal is not execute everything at once, but to really refine what we do as we go. The final homework will emphasize quality in a significant way, so that if you rush to do it all now you may end up redoing your code significantly for the final turn-in. Now with that warning given, during this phase we first want to implement the basic CRUD (Create Read Update Delete) pattern for the habits monitored. This mean we should be able to add a habit, edit a habit, delete a habit and of course list our habits. We also will need to indicate that we accomplished the habit or not (ex: The thumbs up/down of a habit). The addition or modification of a habit should provide at least basic validation that required items are provided. You may find that smart defaults avoid you having to write code, your aim is simply the creation of incomplete entries. You also should try to guard against the inclusion of bad items into the program such as injected script code (XSS). However, since we are operating client-side such validations may be more cosmetic than deep security. For deletion of habits we should also guard against an accidental deletion with some sort of confirmation mechanism. Given the simplicity of the app, try to be complete in your thinking and consider how the testers (graders) may try to break it!

We will store the habits in local memory as JavaScript objects and/or arrays, but understand that you will eventually use a third party service (either Firebase or Parse) to hold our data in the cloud. You may execute with such a service now, but it is not required for the prototype you may find just using a local object fine at first. Also in the next phase you will need to add in authentication for the end user. The specified services may provide such features for you easily, but you are lacking screens to perform this, so you will need to fill those in beyond the code you write. This may include both login/logout buttons as well as recovery mechanisms.

There is a tremendous amount of interactive polish that could be added to the habit application using CSS, JavaScript or a combination of the two technologies. For example, you probably should show and hide fields and screens gracefully with some transition effect. Also when the user edits or delete an item you may slide out controls and transition the chart. The simple bar chart and percentage of conformance might be animated or treated in a pleasing way using code or CSS. We will call all these ideas "UI focused JavaScript." The end user may be quite impressed or annoyed by your "UI focused JavaScript" so consider carefully what you implement.

A major area that clearly has not been well considered is how notifications might work in the application. Clearly the user will need to be alerted to come and fill in their habit status. We may use Web Notifications to do this, but that may have issues. It is clear in our current set of screens we lack a flow for how this process might work. This phase should have you research the flow of how you may need to remind users to address their habits and all the cases you may need to address by adding this feature (for example turing off notifications, sleep or pausing until later, etc.) Since we are working with a set design we should try to respect that existing design as we add any new fields or screens into the app.

Code wise we are not required to use any frameworks, so straight vanilla JavaScript is fine. We may also use jQuery and/or Backbone for application structure, but understand such libraries may be unnecessary for what we want to accomplish. Students should certainly avoid the use of more extensive frameworks like AngularJS or React as they are probably overkill for this level of an application. However, for specific problems like Notifications or some transitions you may find specialized libraries useful. Given that we are going to aim for quality eventually including 100k library to write 2 lines versus writing say 35 lines yourself will not be looked at as a reasonable solution in Homework 5. For a prototype we may be ok with a library heavy approach, but for a final production version that may be inappropriate.

To address the previous point let's discuss what is coming up in the last assignment. Besides finishing the program by implementing missing features such as authentication and cloud storage as well as adding in any missing polish, we will also prepare our application for release in a number of ways. First the application will be properly prepared for delivery by being minified (markup, CSS, and JS) and combined. There are tools that can automate that type of build process that are easily findable if you look around. Also we will need to investigate how the application may be distributed by determining how we may package it as a mobile application (ex. Apache Cordova), a Web application (ex. Chrome store or MS Store), and standard Web site. Getting some sense of these approaches early on might be useful to make the final homework much easier, but are not required to be addressed in this assignment. Since the application will be mobile, the final assignment places an emphasis on execution and load time. Finally, time permitting you may be asked to add in monitors for JavaScript errors and other aspects user aware application design such as well-thought out user monitoring.

Make sure your initial prototype works properly in latest Firefox, Chrome, Safari, and Internet Explorer and that an end user can just type in your URL to click thru the app. You should have had a repo in Github or Bitbucket from the previous assignment, continue to use that.

